---
layout: post
title:  "Creating an Efficient Marketplace for Decentralized Data"
date:   2016-10-05 16:05:04 -0400
categories: newsbot
---
Governmental and non-governmental organizations are currently harvesting massive amounts of data about individuals from their online transactions. These organizations are using this data for their own benefit, without compensating the individuals who generate it. Moreover, the vast data warehouses thus accumulated have occasionally fallen prey to malicious intrusions that have harmed the individuals whose data was thus compromised. 

We need a framework to secure the data we generate while still selectively allowing it to be leveraged for research and development purposes. Data collected online has already become a significant source of value for companies, as well as an important resource for research on human behavior. IoT devices promise to drastically increase the amount of data on our habits, health and preferences that is stored or transmitted off of the generating device. This data, as well as the data we are already generating should be controlled by those who generate it. Those who want to access this data should compensate those who generate it. This year, I will be thinking about frameworks for storing and selling data in a secure, fair, and publicly understandable way. 

Blockchain technology has made new types of marketplaces where transactions can be much more complex and easily enforceable than ever before. Ethereum has proved the viability of such systems of exchange at what I consider a somewhat reasonable level of performance for the application I am envisioning. Speculation about what such Turing-complete blockchains could support has led to interest in how data could be securely stored and even transacted over decentralized networks. 

Some systems have emerged that implement one idea of what this would look like. These systems combine a [blockchain with pointers to off-chain data storage][decentralizing], or a public blockchain that supports [integration with a distributed hash table and multi-party compute system][enigma] comprising nodes that are paid for their role in storage and computation of queries over data. The latter idea has the advantage of full storage security but the disadvantage of elevated cost to coordinate computation over a potentially large number of nodes.  

These efforts recognize the usefulness of a system that gives control of data back to the creators of that data, but they do not fully recognize the potential of such an approach as it applies to the massive amounts of data that will be generated by the internet of things. Most critically, they have yet to create a vocabulary around these systems that can effectively answer questions about privacy, and allow individuals to control the data they share with ease. If this paradigm is to be successful (and I am of the opinion that it is extremely important to our future that it is) we will need to be able to communicate the privacy attributes of such systems to users. From there, we will need to create easy interfaces through which the user can choose to sell none of their data, sell all of their data, or sell data under specific conditions of their choosing.

We are at an important juncture in the development of data management systems because of the massive amount of data that is coming online through the IoT. The monetization model of the internet at present is not compatible with IoT devices, which will create a vacuum in data collection in the IoT as companies scramble to monetize them. During this period, those who care about privacy will have a unique opportunity to push for systems where data is owned by the owners (or renters, depending on how the landscape pans out) of the devices before a centralized paradigm of data ownership becomes engrained as it has for the internet of personal computers. For this reason, it is important to create a protocol that is more application-flexible, understandable, and interoperable than any of the proposed systems are at this time. In doing so, the most important thing to keep in mind is that a system is not decentralized if only a small group is able to effect the implementation of contracts that take into account their (data sale) preferences. Such a project will not be successful unless it is usable. 

[decentralizing]: http://web.media.mit.edu/~guyzys/data/ZNP15.pdf
[enigma]: http://enigma.media.mit.edu/enigma_full.pdf